Morning
Session now, uh,
and hearing submissions today on the Fast Track approvals
Amendment Bill, uh, and first up, today we have Forest
and Ver welcome Richard to the Select Committee.
Good morning this morning. Uh, you are with us
for 20 minutes this morning, so, uh,
take your submission as read.
Of course, uh, members will have questions,
but we'll hand over to you for your opening remarks.
Uh, good morning. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Tana Carto, Carto, everybody.
Uh, and thank you for this opportunity to speak.
Uh, my name is Richard Kappy.
I'm Chief advisor at Forest and Bird,
and fingers crossed joining me online, uh, is, uh,
Peter Anson, uh, barrister, uh, who has been advising Forres
and Bird on a number of the fast track applications
that are currently in train.
Since the Fast Track Approvals Act came into force, Forrest
and Bird has been engaged constructively in a number
of significant fast track projects.
We have experience from the front line
and several decisions.
Fast track panels themselves have explicitly acknowledged
the value that organizations like Forest
and Bird are bringing to the process.
These examples demonstrate that their independent expertise
improves outcomes, reduces environmental risk,
and actually increases public trust.
Against this background, it is extremely concerning
that the Amendment Bill would effectively shut out such
advice from future fast Track
decision if passed.
This bill removes the ability for panels to provide
or invite in input from experts, NGOs, or community groups.
Unless councils decline to comment.
It blocks invited experts
and NGOs from appealing clear legal errors.
It allows applicants to influence who sits on panels
deciding their applications,
and it concentrates decision making
in the hands of ministers.
It also collectively reduces legal oversight
and public transparency.
These are very material decisions that will lead
to poor decision making
and greater long-term risk to communities,
ecosystems, and the crown.
Before I talk a little bit more in detail about our
concerns, I'd like to make some comments about the process
that this legislation has been following.
Uh, as you know, this bill began, uh, with a bit
of a narrow kind of punt around grocery competition.
I note the gross the term grocery is mentioned once in
substantive clauses, specifically Clause 59.
The bill itself focuses on the fast track process
as a whole, uh, with the specific policy
for supermarket competition outlined separately,
I would suggest that if the government really wishes
to improve grocery competition,
they should focus legislation to achieve that purpose.
Instead, this bill made without public input
and without a regulatory impact assessment significantly
alters New Zealander's Democratic rights
to participate in decision making.
And bear in mind that these are, by their very nature,
under the original legislation nationally
and regionally significant,
these are landscaping community altering decisions
that will last generations.
There was no analysis
of these changes in the related treasury briefings,
yet they have major implications for public participation.
Ian Harley writes, environmental safeguards
and administrative Fairness.
The amounts of time provided to Parliament
and the New Zealand public to consider
and comment on legislation of this important
and magnitude is totally unacceptable.
The number of submissions on the original legislation
clearly show the level of interest
and show the strength of feeling around fast track.
Uh, IMY Sins was one of 27,000 people
who marched down Queen Street in protest against
the original legislation.
The level of interest in this bill is very significant.
The amount of time that people have got to comment on it
and participate in this process is negligible.
Returning to the draft legislation itself,
a critical concern for forest
and bird is the concentration
of powers in the hands of ministers.
The bill would allow ministers
to issue government policy statement defining what counts
as quote unquote regional
or national benefit panels would be required
to consider these statements.
Something that in effect,
let's minister predetermine the benefits of a project,
while panels will then only be responsible
for assessing the environmental costs.
This goes against the very logic that this committee
and Parliament relied on when shifting decision making from
ministers to independent panels last year.
These ministerial statements require no public input,
require consultation only
with ministers whose portfolios match the subject matter,
excluding environmental ministers significantly.
They also give ministers disproportionate control
over panel outcomes.
To all intents
and purposes, they vest ministers with the ability
to pick winners and greenlight projects.
The risks flagged during the original legislation remain
removing transparency and openness, undermining checks
and balances on executive power,
and furthering open further opening up the prospect
of lobbying and conflicts of interest.
Forest and bird strongly recommends removing these clauses.
While this proposed change is perhaps the most concerning.
There are other changes in this propo in this bill
that are perhaps just as bad.
The bill removes the requirements to consult council's,
agencies, iwi and hapu before lodging applications.
This is inconsistent with Titi
and risks reducing Maori involvement in decisions affecting
reducing com comment timeframes to 20 day from 20 days
to 15 days, makes it harder for agencies
with statutory environmental responsibilities
to provide robust evidence-based advice.
Again, thinking about the nature of these projects,
it feels like we are trying to shoot ourselves in the foot
by reducing the amount of time to gather
and collect evidence to make good decisions.
The bill denies NGOs
and community groups, the appeal ability
to appeal on legal errors,
even when a panel invites their input.
Errors of law will instead be pushed into judicial review,
which is slower, more expensive and counterproductive.
So if the intent behind this bill is to speed things up, uh,
I think you need to think again.
Requiring potential panel members names to be given
to applicants invites panel shopping
and actually fundamentally undermines the
independence of decision makers.
This is most egregious, allowing ministers
to change schedule two by order of council
is constitutionally inappropriate
and bypasses parliamentary scrutiny on project scope,
allowing applicants to substantially modify an application
with no opportunity for further expert input risks panels
approving projects never considered at the referral stage.
So taken together these changes,
silence independent environmental expertise,
reduce transparency, diminish democratic participation,
increase legal and environmental risk.
Weak can checks on ministerial
and applicant's applicant influence,
undermine public confidence in environmental decision
making, and ultimately, they will lead
to worse decision making.
You don't improve the ability to get things right
for massive, complex projects like a new tunnel
through the middle of Wellington
or a new hydro dam by putting in place arbitrary
and unrealistic timeframes
and limiting your own ability to seek information.
Do we really think it only requires three times as long
to consider an application for a new Mount Victoria Tunnel,
as it does to consider an application
for a new house on Mount Victoria?
This is not a minor technical amendment.
It is a significant weakening of public
and environmental safeguards
and will lead to worse decision making.
Accordingly, forest
and Bird asked the committee to remove provisions,
enabling government policy statements on benefits,
remove restrictions on panels, inviting expert comment,
preserve full rights of appeal on points of law,
retain meaningful consultation requirements with councils,
iwi and affected parties, remove provisions,
allowing applicants to influence panel appointments.
Remove the ability
to amend Schedule two via order in council,
allow panels flexibility in decision timeframes,
and provide further comment when applicants are
materially modified.
Finally, I'd conclude by noting Forrest
and Bird has proven that constructive expert public input
improves decisions and reduces environmental harm.
The member Bill would reduce our, remove that voice.
We urge the committee to protect transparency,
democratic rights,
and the health of our environment
by rejecting the most damaging provisions of this bill.
Failing to do so will make this law unsupportable
and remove any semblance of legitimacy.
This, in turn, significantly increases the justification
and likelihood that decisions made under this law will be
revisited and won't be recognized by a future government.
Nahed Nui, uh,
for Bird would welcome the opportunity to answer your questions.
Thank you.
Thank you, Richard, for that very passionate, uh,
insight and submission.
Look, we've got a couple of questions, so we will move
to Celia Wade Brown.
First,
Um, thank you and really appreciate, um,
not just the passion, but the depth in which you've actually
looked at this bill, given the very short time
that it's been around.
And I would like you to enlarge on how
in 0.5 you say
that it would exclude Forest and Bird
and presumably many other organizations
on all future fast tracked applications.
Could you, it's not just to do with grocery shops
and, um, we'd all like, um,
a little bit more competition there,
but what, what, uh, why,
why do you think there's absolutely no limitation
on which projects Forest and Bird would be excluded from?
So, I'll, I'll just comment. Um, the nature
of the bill is, is not about grocery competition.
It is about fundamentally amending the fast track
legislation and the changes would apply
to all future projects.
Um, Pete, I'll hand over to you
'cause you've been actively involved in, uh, a number
of the actual projects on the ground.
So maybe you could give a bit of color to actually what
that involvement and panel processes looks like.
Um, yeah, sure. Um, if you want, yeah, so, um, just to,
to answer that question that the, um, the, the currently
for Berg gets invited to comment on a number of these, uh,
applications, and it's done so,
and it's done so, um, in a way that has been recognized
by panels as being constructed.
Then, um, and useful, the the way in which that, that will,
um, proceed in future is that
that will only happen if there's no one else around, um,
the council so that they,
that they'll be dealing with the issue.
So effectively it, it removes, um, that,
that voice from the, you know, the NGO or
or other potential comments, it's not just forest
and Bird that this apply to from being able
to participate in the process
and that that voice is, um, is often the only voice
that's going to going to be advocating for a certain,
um, uh, outcome.
And a good example is that was the genesis, um, fast track
scheme, which for was invited to comment
and effectively was, um, the lone voice in relation
to certain parts of that.
And the, the way in which these processes work best is
where you have, um,
it's a co it's a both two sides arguing their point
and then the panel making a decision.
And if you don't have that, that second side, then the,
the decision making is, is far, is far less robust.
Thank you. Very clear. Thank you.
Look, we'll move to Rachel
Brooking now. Thank you. And
related to that, uh, I know Forest
and Bird is involved in a lot
of resource management in Conservation Act
and other, uh, issues.
And I wanted to talk about the scale of the projects
because Richard, you said consenting a tunnel
is different from consenting a house at Mount Victoria.
And so is it forest
and birds experience that all of the fast track projects
that Forest and Bird has been involved in,
or most of them, you tell me which one are of a scale
that would normally end up in front
of a judge at an environment court.
Uh, and then secondly, if you can also comment on
the sorts of, um, evidence briefs that Forest
and Bird has been giving.
And I say that because you've just told us, uh, the Peter
that, uh, you are only be invited to comment via panel
with these changes if the council doesn't have expertise
and it recognizes that it doesn't have expertise
and asks for, um, forest and birds involvement.
And what sort of involvement, um, have you been giving
to these fast track applications?
I can, I can already answer that.
Um, Richard, so, so the first, the first, um,
the first answer is, um, the projects
that we've been involved in have ranged from the,
from the very significant.
So that would be the, the likes of trans resources,
seabed Mining, and the, and the Taranaki bike to, to, um,
to, to ones that are at the less,
you know, of the scale of them.
So, and, and would, would, would, would all
of them end up in front of a court?
Maybe, maybe not. Some
of them might, some of them might not.
That might not happen for some of the,
the less controversial ones.
But, you know, the likes of trans resources,
that's probably gonna always end up in front of a court
because it's so, um, controversial.
And I guess the, the, the notion that,
that you can have a panel make sense
for decision within 60 working days
of receiving comments just seems, um, it seems, um,
are totally implausible.
Um, given, given the the breadth of, of complicated
and difficult issues to resolve.
It's just going to result in, in poor decision making and,
and decisions that are gonna be, um, able to be challenged
because they, they haven't had time,
the panels haven't had time to consider the issues,
but they're forced to make a decision.
So, so that, that's the,
that's the first, um, that's the first point.
Second point in relation to the expertise that's been, um,
called forests called a range of expertise, um, in, in,
in the, in the case of, I've been, been involved in two
of them, um, which as tt r Genesis I said before,
and that's in involved calling ecological evidence from, um,
from freshwater Ian, terrestrial, marine mammal,
um, experts also calling, um, planning evidence and, um,
and evidence on economics.
So we've been kind of fully engaged in all the, in all the,
all the disciplines that you would expect to arise in
these kind of processes.
So just as supplementary to that, uh, those types
of experts that you just mentioned, ecological
and avian, what are they providing to the panels?
How is that helpful and is, uh,
consideration of those matters?
Just stopping things from being built?
No, so, so effectively that the, the evidence
that's being called from the EC college is just
to outline the impacts of the act
that the activities will have, um,
on those ecological features.
And, and, and that's, that's generally, um,
there'll be some evidence from the,
and evidence from those cases just provide, you know,
different, different interpretations, um, have they have
that resulted in things not happening.
The Genesis ones controlled activity.
So, um, so that, that was never gonna,
you know, that has to be granted.
So, um, no,
that hasn't slowed down in transit, some resources.
Um, it's just, it's a large, it's a large project with a lot
of, um, invited parties.
So, um, engaging in one additional, um, party,
which I think we call three breach of evidence in
that planning, uh, and economics
and marine mammals, it just adds, it adds to the quality
of decision making, not to the length of time.
And so does it add to changes in consent conditions?
Uh, hard, hard to tell, hard to tell at the moment.
Um, I dunno, I, I,
So typically in our resource management process,
when you are providing information, it's one of the factors
that gets picked up in the consenting decision.
So the better information you have, the, the more likely
that a panel is able to make a good robust decision,
which actually manages the effects of something
that they've decided will go ahead.
So this isn't just about stopping things,
this is actually about improving the outcomes
for the communities that are gonna be affected.
The other thing is, as Pete said,
if you've got a weak process, then it is more likely
to end up in a legislative, um, uh, challenge.
So making sure that you've got a robust process in place
where people have got time to gather the right evidence
where the right evidence is brought forward,
that actually reduces the, the risk of litigation.
Um, so the changes have been proposed here are actually
likely to make the, the risk of judicial review greater.
So rather than trying to expedite a process, this,
this is likely to have the opposite effect.
Thank you. Look, we'll move
to Cameron Luxton for his question. Thank you.
And Chair, uh, I've got a question, Richard, about one
of the com uh, comments you made, uh,
regarding grocery competition, um,
requires specific legislation.
Would you concur with many people who, uh, who, who say
that the, the, one of the major issues
with getting Go grocery competition is New Zealand's long
consenting timeframes, uh, making overseas competitors
unlikely to want to come to our far-flung part of the world
and actually provide that grocery competition competition
that would drive down prices
for New Zealanders when they're gonna the grocery store.
Um, I, I don't think Forest
and Bird has an issue about, uh, provisions being made to,
uh, improve grocery competition.
This bill is not about that.
Um, so there are some provisions in this,
but they're minor compared
with the rest of the legislation. So
Just to be clear, before moving back onto the rest
of the legislation, you don't think that, uh,
consenting pathways taking multiple years
for grocery competitions to end, uh, competitors
to enter New Zealand market is a fact
that grocery competition,
Um, I, I think there's been a wealth
of information written about the different issues behind,
uh, the challenges faced in New Zealand
around grocery competition.
I think that's one of the areas that has been touched on.
Thank you. Look, I'm just gonna ask the last question
that we have time for, um,
because you do talk about, um, the projects
that you've already been involved in, um,
and you say that you feel you've got better outcomes.
Can you give an exact example of, um, the, a project
where you contributed to
and what that outcome was
that you felt was a better outcome?
Sure. I I think probably the, the observation I'll make is
that the, the five that we're involved in are still active.
So I don't think any of them are
completed at this point in time.
Pete, um, maybe you could add
a bit of color to that in terms
Yeah, no, it's probably too early in the process to, um,
to, to actually be able to do that
because the, the, um, the, uh, the ones that, yeah, they'll,
they're still active in un and underweight, but
Okay, you,
because you have put that in your submission that, um,
you know, obviously the contribution is adding
to better outcomes, but are you saying it's just too early
to tell us? Well, what, what,
What, what we're saying is that the panels have been
recognizing, recognizing the engagement and the,
and the value that Forest Bird has added to the process.
But in terms of how, how
that results in substantive outcomes, it's, it's kind
of too early to, to actually say,
or would, there's recognition there from decision makers
that our, our engagement in the process is, is valued.
I, I think a key point is that we,
we respect the independence of the panels
and their legitimacy.
What we are hearing back from them is their ability
to get information from organizations like Forest
and Bird is helping them in their deliberations
and providing value.
And I think that is the key point when it comes
to this bill, is that this bill would close that down,
and I think that is completely unnecessary and unwise.
Thank you very much, Richard.
We will have to leave it there. We have met time.
Uh, we appreciate your time today, uh,
and your insightful submission,
so thank you. Thank you much.
Thanks, Sam. Thank you. Uh,
Now we will move on to the New Zealand Law Society, uh,
who I understand are joining us via Zoom online today.
Good morning. We can see you there.
Welcome to the select committee this morning.
You have 20 minutes with us.
We'll hand over to you for introductions and,
and members will have questions.
Um, Kiara Coto. Um, I'm Daniel. I'm Daniel Jackson.
And, um, I appear with, uh, uh, my colleague, uh,
Sarah Shaw, um, on behalf of the New Zealand Law Society.
We are both members of its, um, environmental Law Committee.
Uh, and, um, we'll,
we'll just touch in our oral presentation on some
of the major, um, concerns outlined in part A
of the Law Society's, um, submission.
I'll start and then hand over to Ms. Shaw.
Um, and so, uh, our, our first concern is
around the, uh, rushed process, um, with the law
and the limited, uh, consultation, uh, and engagement
and the limited timeframe, um, for submissions.
We think that this risks, um, producing, uh, a law
that doesn't achieve its objectives
and could prove unworkable in places.
Uh, and so, for instance, um, we have highlighted how the,
uh, proposed restrictions on, on consultation by panels, um,
could, could prove unworkable, uh,
because they'd have to, um, check with local authorities,
um, as to whether, uh, you know, whether they're planning
to submit all particular issues,
and then could only invite other parties if they, uh,
thought if, if, if they considered that, that
what the local authorities
and statutory agencies would be
providing would be insufficient.
Um, and that the point, the point that we make there is
that at this stage of the process, it's very likely
that the local authorities, um,
and statute authorities will not have decided, uh,
what they're going to say in their submissions or comments.
Uh, and therefore it's going to be impossible for the panel
to make that sort of informed decision.
Um, we're also concerned about the workability in relation
to timeframes, which I'll come onto in a moment.
Um, the second point is around the
ministerial powers.
So the bill, uh, would allow the minister
to issue a government policy statement, um, regarding,
uh, uh, what, what co in essence,
what constitutes regional, uh,
or national, uh, benefits of, um,
the significant regional national benefits.
Uh, we think that there needs to be some safeguards there.
Um, there's no public consultation process for that
as there are for government policy statements under, uh,
a number of other statutes.
Um, and we think that there need to be some, some sort of,
uh, uh, guidance on, on what can be included in that.
Uh, so for example, providing
that a government policy statement can't seek to enable
specific projects, um, and requiring consultation, um,
and, uh, uh, following the provisions, um, uh,
the approach of the, of existing provisions in
the Crown Entities Act.
Um, so for, so, uh, actually, sorry, that
that's in relation also to the, um, to the proposed power
to, to issue, um, directions to the EPA over,
um, over how it, uh, exercises its functions under the act.
Uh, that, that's the other ministerial power
that we have concern about,
because in, in essence, the, the EPAs per performing, um,
independent functions, uh, statutory functions
as the administering agency under it,
and we think that there need to be provisions, uh,
like in the Crown intersect that make clear
that the minister, um,
can't direct a specific action in regard to a,
to a statutorily independent function as opposed
to setting general expectations on the agency.
Um, and the final concern that I want to note is
around the reductions in timeframes.
Um, so the bill provides
for shorter timeframes at several stages of the process,
including requiring the panel convener
to set up a panel within 15 working days
of receiving a substantive application, uh,
and also capping the timeframe for a panel
to issue its decision at 60 working days, um,
after the deadline for comments
unless the applicant agrees otherwise.
Uh, we think that that's going to be, in some cases,
unworkable, uh, for both of those.
Um, the, and on average, it's taken 20 to 30 working days
so far for the panel convener to set up a panel.
Um, they have to find su uh, panel members
with suitable expertise are available,
which isn't always easy.
Um, and this timeframe has allowed them to conference
with key participants to enable, uh, informed
and efficient procedural decisions.
And that often, um, pays dividends down the process.
Um, and we also think that the 60 working days period, um,
will just prove unrealistic, particularly in, uh,
highly complex applications.
And the timeframes and the legislation already put panels,
applicants and other participants under great time pressure.
And so our recommendation is that in both cases,
the panel convener needs to have the ability
to set a longer timeframe, um,
where it wouldn't be practicable to meet the timeframes
that are proposed from the bill on this point.
Um, and it,
and I'll hand over now to Ms. Shaw, um, to speak
to the other, uh, concerns.
Are you able to see us, uh, Sarah, I think you,
you might have your video off.
Here we go. Good morning.
So the, uh, the second two points are, um,
first is the right of appeal.
So rights of appeal are narrowed under the bill,
excluding a number of parties from appeal,
including anyone additional from whom the panel has chosen
to invite to submit.
And that's recognizing that the ability to invite comment,
uh, is also substantially narrowed under the bill.
The Law society has significant concerns about this
reduction in appeal rights, uh, both relating
to national natural justice and also
because, uh, the law society considers
that it will not have the intended effect.
An era of law that could have been raised under appeal can
also be raised by judicial review with the high court.
And so establishing, um, a framework
through these amendments where the concerns are likely
to be actually drawn out
through two separate processes simultaneously, uh, is likely
to result in greater procedural complexity,
greater inefficiency
and additional expense for the applicant.
And this is an example which illustrates the law society's
wider concern that the proposals in the bill, uh,
reduced consultation constrained timeframes, limited rights
with appeal will ultimately prove counterproductive, uh, in,
in addition to raising issues of natural justice, uh,
that could perversely undermine the efficiency
and effectiveness that's been sought
through the fast track process itself
and the government's intentions for the bill.
And the last point was around transitional provisions.
The bill contains none, which is a significant emission.
If transitional provisions are not included,
it'll be extremely challenging for users of the legislation,
and there is a real risk that it could lead to mitigation.
The orthodox position is
that legislative amendments do not apply.
Retrospectively media reports have noted minister's
expectations that these changes would apply
to projects already under consideration as long
as the decision had not yet been issued.
If this is the intention, any proposal
to apply those amendments
to existing applications would need specific
transitional provisions.
There would, however, be significant complexity in
that approach and in law society's view, little gained
in seeking to apply those processes to current applications.
So the simplest and fairest solution is the orthodox
position that the amendments would not
apply retrospectively.
So in effect, anything that had already, um, been submitted
before the bill receives ascent, uh,
the provisions would not apply.
Alternatively, um, the new processes could take effect, uh,
but only if applications had not yet, um, gone
to a panel, that would be, um,
the other way of dealing with it.
Um, or they could go to this, the remaining parts,
but the suggestion that the, um, decision could have
to be reworked based on the new provisions is unworkable in
the new society section.
Thank, thank, uh, look, we moved to, uh, from Rachel.
Yeah. Uh, and in interesting there
that you are making the same point as forest
and bird, that in fact, this, these changes could lead
to slowing down things
because decisions won't be made properly
and there'll be more scope for judicial review.
Um, I'm interested in the comments
and your experience with, uh, environment courts
and hearings and, and other processes around the suitability
of the people on the panel
and what sort of expertise you're talking about.
So I'm not so interested in the, uh,
maybe the smaller scale projects,
but the big complex projects.
What sort of expertise would you expect
to see on these panels, regardless of the,
if they're a fast track project
or if they're going to an environment court
or a special hearings body,
independent hearings panel type process?
And how does that expertise that a decision maker might have
help with or benefit the process and your experience?
And how many, and the, the secondary question is, um,
how many of those types of people exist in New Zealand?
Oh, can you hear hear
That? Yes. Yes. Um,
so the, the types
of expertise depends on the nature of the project.
And so the question is in terms
of across the environment court, uh,
the traditional council hearing processes and fast tracks.
So the environment court, uh, typically sits as a panel
of three with a presiding judge.
And, um, and for a typical application, there are two
of the environment commissioners
who are assigned those environment commissioners have
expertise across, uh, engineering, landscape ecology
planning, um, among other, um, so among other, so the,
the panel for an environment called the bench
for an environment court hearing is hand selected
for the nature of the application,
and the bench can be larger than the typical three if they
need to add additional expertise, uh, for council hearings,
um, the largest panels can be, um, I'm,
I'm chairing one of, of nine.
Uh, the typical council panels, um,
unless it's sole, um, chairperson are typically, uh,
at least three, there can be five.
The expertise, again, comes from a range
of commissioner experience across, uh,
relevant to the application.
So it could be ecology, landscape, stormwater, heritage, uh,
the expertise is, is hand selected.
The benefits of that expertise to the process is to be able
to interrogate the evidence that is presented.
So it doesn't matter which forum, uh, it's to engage
with the expert evidence to, um,
make findings on the evidence
and to consider not just the approvals process,
but also the appropriateness of conditions.
Um, so I think that answered all parts of the question.
Just, just the last part of the question,
and thank you for that answer, uh, was about how many
of the, you've talked about people being handpicked, how,
how much of that depth of expertise is in New Zealand
and in terms of, uh, the timing you mentioned earlier, um,
Daniel, about the, uh, the time it takes to set up a panel
to work out who these, the right people are.
Daniel, did you wanna address that last part
Of it? Yeah, um,
I mean, certainly what we've heard is that, um,
you know, in some cases it has been challenging to find, uh,
people with suitable expertise
and who are also available, um, in the relevant time period
and don't have conflicts, um, for, uh, uh, to be on panels,
particularly if you're looking for, uh,
expertise in a specific area.
And there's actually a requirement proposed
to be added in the bill to require panels, to have someone
with expertise in the, essentially the,
the subject matter area of the, um, application.
So if you're looking for a specific, um,
area expertise in a specific area,
and you are also, um, needing someone who's available
to do quite a lot of work fairly intensely in a particular
timeframe and, um, doesn't have any confidence of interest,
then that may require, you know, going to quite a number
of people before you actually find, uh,
somebody who's, who's able to do it.
And that all takes time, um,
which is difficult if you've now got a very limited
timeframe for setting up the panel.
Thank you. Thank you, uh, Ryan, with the next question.
Oh, thanks Chair. Uh, Sarah, in your, um, submission,
you talked about how this proposed process is gonna
streamline some of the, um, I guess processes
and doing, doing them concurrently
and the view that it will speed up
and make it more efficient by up to six weeks.
Your argument was that it's potentially gonna, uh,
make it more challenging
and slow the process down and inefficient.
So I was just wondering where that rationale is coming from.
Thank you. Um, so the rationale for the, the submission
that, um,
counterintuitively the amendments could actually slow things
down, uh, is that there are a number of,
while there are a number of streamlining provisions added,
there are actually also some that, um,
will inherently add additional steps.
So for example, there's a proposal for the ability
to contest, uh, the suitability of panel members,
and there are, um, working days assigned for that process.
Or in fact, there, there are no working days assigned.
There's no time limit assigned for one of those parts
of the process, which is
for applicants to provide their comments.
So that's adding an additional step that is not currently,
um, dealt with in that way.
Currently, it's dealt with, um, through the convener calling
a, um, a conference of the parties to discuss that in a,
in a single, um, meeting.
So other examples where things could end up taking longer is
that if, uh, that the removal
of consultation from the beginning of the process
and replacement of that with notification.
Uh, generally in resource management circles, the earlier
that issues can be flushed out
and can be considered by an applicant,
the better an application tends to be in its substance.
So the replacement of consultation with notification early
is something that could counterintuitively end up with more,
um, time required later in the process to actually try
and tease out what those issues are
and for the applicant to then respond to them.
Uh, another one is the example that we've given
where if the appeal rights are removed from people
and uh, they take a judicial review instead,
then those would be two separate high court processes rather
than being joined as a single high court process.
And then that those two high court processes are being run
on completely separate timeframes
and completely separate proceedings.
So those are three.
Um, just, and earlier in your comments, you mentioned
that one of the new things
that's being proposed has no working days tagged to it,
so it's a bit, I guess, ambiguous.
But if we put working days on that, would
that not then clarify or time that process
It would for that particular steps.
So the law societies made specific recommendations in the
table for a number of improvements that could be made if,
uh, the provisions are gonna remain.
Uh, but the point being that that entire process
of contesting the appointment of panel members, um,
is an additional step in the process
that was not previously provided for.
Um, and there are other examples where, um,
extra time is going to be, uh, taken to resolve some
of these issues potentially, uh, where this,
the system currently, uh, does provide flexibility for those
to be, um, worked out before the application is lodged
or through, uh, the tling of individual application.
Thank you. Q, See, can I, I like to ask
to expand on section four
where you talk about the unusually broad powers
that this bill would give to ministers,
and in particular whether, um, their ability to
issue a government policy statement, um,
almost about a particular project rather than a really broad
policy statement, um, could open our
resource management systems up to accusations of corruption.
Uh, well, I think our, our concern here is essentially
that there is very little, uh, it's virtually nothing
provided in the bill, uh, regarding what,
what a government policy statement, uh, ca can do, uh,
beyond simply the statement, uh, that it, that it would, uh,
contain provisions regarding, uh, what qualifies as, uh, uh,
regional or na significant regional and national benefits.
Uh, so it's essentially an open-ended discretion
and we don't think it would be appropriate
for those statements to be targeted at, um,
particular projects
because obviously, uh, there's supposed
to be an independent process here
and, uh, it, it would be inappropriate for the minister
to be essentially saying
to the panel who's making a decision on whether there's
significant national or regional benefits, there's,
that there's significant national, regional benefits, uh,
for a particular project that would undermine the
independence of the decision making.
So, so what we think is important, uh, is to, is
for, to include some, some safeguards to ensure
that the project, um, is that the power isn't, um, able
to be used to make directions in relation
to a particular pro, to a particular project, um, rather
that it's supposed to be a more general power, um,
in addition to our recommendation re re uh, regarding, uh,
requiring consultation.
Thank you. Thank you.
Just time for one last question from Grant Pellum.
Yeah, very quickly, um, just you,
you talk about the timeframes is obviously a bit of concern
and particularly when referring to larger projects,
60 days is, might not be, um, long enough, I suppose, is
what, what would you consider a more realistic timeframe
for this, for the decision making process once you get to
that point for, from particularly for more complex projects?
Well, I think, I think the point that we'd make is
that it is quite dependent on the nature
of the particular project.
So, you know, some projects, 60 working days might be fine,
uh, other, other day, uh, other projects, uh,
really we think it's important
that the convener has the ability to set a, um, a,
a project, a a timeframe that's based on the,
on the, on the particular project.
And we have seen projects where the, the timeframe
that the applicant has in fact said, we think is, is,
is reasonable, is, is more than, uh, 60 days
because they recognize the complexity of it.
So it, it, it does depend, you know,
you're seeing some projects, um, where you know, it, it,
it might be longer than that might be, say,
a hundred working days.
But I think our position would be that rather than having a
specific, you know, arbitrary cutoff, there needs
to be some flexibility for the convener to set
what is necessary
for the particular project taking into account, for example,
the volume of information, the complexity, the, the number
of commenters and so on.
Thank you. Look, thank you very much.
We have met time today. We appreciate your time very much.
Your submission very thorough. So you have a good day.
Thank you. Thank you.